Update taint docs (#1446)
semgrep/semgrep-docs: docs/writing-rules/data-flow/taint-mode.md

slug: taint-mode
append_help_link: true
description: >-

>   Taint mode allows you to write simple rules that catch complex injection bugs thanks to taint analysis (aka taint tracking).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Taint mode allows you to write simple rules that catch complex injection bugs thanks to taint analysis.
```

---

# Taint analysis

> Semgrep supports [taint analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taint_checking) (or taint tracking) via so-called taint rules (`mode: taint`). Taint analysis is a data-flow analysis that tracks the flow of untrusted (**tainted**) data throughout the body of a function or method. Tainted data originate from tainted **sources**. If tainted data are not transformed or checked accordingly (**sanitized**), taint analysis reports a finding whenever tainted data reach a vulnerable function (called **sink**). Tainted data flow from sources to sinks through **propagators** (such as assignments, or function calls).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Semgrep supports [taint analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taint_checking) (or taint tracking) through taint rules (specified by adding `mode: taint` to your rule). Taint analysis is a data-flow analysis that tracks the flow of untrusted, or **tainted** data throughout the body of a function or method. Tainted data originate from tainted **sources**. If tainted data are not transformed or checked accordingly (**sanitized**), taint analysis reports a finding whenever tainted data reach a vulnerable function, called a **sink**. Tainted data flow from sources to sinks through **propagators**, such as assignments, or function calls.
```

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=eqYN8" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

This is the default for historical reasons, but it may change in the future.

It is possible to instruct Semgrep to only consider as taint sources the "exact" matches of a souce pattern by setting `exact: true`:

```yaml
pattern-sources:
- pattern: source(...)
  exact: true
```

Once the source is "exact", Semgrep will no longer consider subexpressions as taint sources, and `sink(x)` inside `source(sink(x))` will not be reported as a tainted sink (unless `x` is tainted in some other way).

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=Zq5ow" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

For many rules this distinction is not very meaningful because it does not always make sense that a sink occurs inside the arguments of a source function.

:::note
If one of your rules relies on non-exact matching of sources, we advice you to make it explicit with `exact: false`, even if it is the current default, so that your rule does not break if the default changes.
:::

> ### Sources by side-effect

Reviewer: I'm just trying to wrap my head around the idea of a tainted side-effect. Given:
```
function add10(x) {
x = x + 10
return x
}
```
I assume the above is a pure function (no side effects), deterministic output.

So a side-effect would be the value of y in the ff example
```
function addy(y, x) {
y = getUserInputNumber()
x = x + y
return x
```
So if we wanted to catch `y`, we'd say:
```
 - patterns:
      - pattern: addy($Y, $X)
      - focus-metavariable: $Y
    by-side-effect: true
```
Is this correct?

Author: The idea seems correct although the example code not be the best one. If you change `addy(y, x)` to `addy(ys, x)`, `y = getUserInputNumber()` to `ys.add(getUserInputNumber())`, and `x = x + y` to `x = x + ys.pop()`, then yeah it's clearly correct. I'm no Python expert but I'm just stressing that `y` would be a mutable object that is being mutated inside `addy`. Numbers in principle are not mutable in Python, I think, and if you `y = getUserInputNumber()` then you're just replacing the value of `y` without altering what has been passed as argument.

Reviewer: Got it. Yeah, it's hard to think of examples (at least for me) sometimes.

Consider the following hypothetical Python code, where `make_tainted` is a function that makes its argument tainted by side-effect:

```python
make_tainted(my_set)
sink(my_set)
```

This kind of source can be specified by setting `by-side-effect: true`:

```yaml
pattern-sources:
  - patterns:
      - pattern: make_tainted($X)
      - focus-metavariable: $X
    by-side-effect: true
```

> When this option is enabled, and the source specification matches a variable (or in general, an l-value) exactly, then Semgrep assumes that the variable (or l-value) becomes tainted by side-effect at the precise places where the source specification produces a match.

Reviewer: For my own knowledge, what is an `l-value`?

> When this option is enabled, and the source specification matches a variable (or in general, an l-value) exactly, then Semgrep assumes that the variable (or l-value) becomes tainted by side-effect at the precise places where the source specification produces a match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this option is enabled, and the source specification matches a variable (or in general, an [l-value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_(computer_science)#lrvalue)) exactly, then Semgrep assumes that the variable (or l-value) becomes tainted by side-effect at the precise places where the source specification produces a match.
```

Author: An `l-value` essentially means "an expression that denotes an object in memory", a memory location, something that you can use in the LHS of an assignment. Maybe we should put the definition in the text too.

Reviewer: I've added this definition to https://github.com/semgrep/semgrep-docs/pull/1155

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=5r400" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

> The matched occurrences themselves are considered tainted too, that is the occurrence of `x` in `make_tainted(x)` is itself tainted too. If you do not want this to be the case, then set `by-side-effect: only` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The matched occurrences themselves are considered tainted; that is, the occurrence of `x` in `make_tainted(x)` is itself tainted too. If you do not want this to be the case, then set `by-side-effect: only` instead.
```

:::note

> It is important to use `focus-metavariable: $X` to focus the match on the l-value that we want to taint, otherwise `by-side-effect` does not work as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must use `focus-metavariable: $X` to focus the match on the l-value that you want to taint, otherwise `by-side-effect` does not work.
```

:::

> If the source does not set `by-side-efect`, then only the very occurrence of `x` in `make_tainted(x)` will be tainted, but not the occurrence of `x` in `sink(x)`. The source specification matches only the first occurrence and, without `by-side-effect: true`, Semgrep does not know that `make_tainted` is updating the variable `x` by side-effect. Thus, a taint rule using such specification does not produce any finding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the source does not set `by-side-efect`, then only the very occurrence of `x` in `make_tainted(x)` will be tainted, but not the occurrence of `x` in `sink(x)`. The source specification matches only the first occurrence and, without `by-side-effect: true`, Semgrep does not know that `make_tainted` is updating the variable `x` by side-effect. Thus, a taint rule using such a specification does not produce any finding.
```

:::info

> One can be tempted to write a source specification as the one below (and this was the official workaround before `by-side-effect`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One can be tempted to write a source specification as the following example (and this was the official workaround before `by-side-effect`):
```

```yaml
pattern-sources:
- patterns:
  - pattern-inside: |
      make_tainted($X)
      ...
  - pattern: $X
```

This tells Semgrep that **every** occurrence of `$X` after `make_tainted($X)` must be considered a source.

> This approach has two main limitations. First, it overrides any sanitization that can be performed on the code matched by `$X`.  In the example code below, the call `sink(x)` is reported as tainted despite `x` has been sanitized!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach has two main limitations. First, it overrides any sanitization that can be performed on the code matched by `$X`.  In the example code below, the call `sink(x)` is reported as tainted despite the fact that `x` has been sanitized!
```

sink(x) # false negative
```

The `by-side-effect` option was added precisely [to address those limitations](https://semgrep.dev/playground/s/JDv4y). However, that kind of workaround can still be useful in other situations!
:::

### Function arguments as sources

To specify that an argument of a function must be considered a taint source, simply write a pattern that matches that argument:

```yaml
pattern-sources:
  - patterns:
    - pattern-inside: |
        def foo($X, ...):
          ...
    - focus-metavariable: $X
```

> Note that the use of `focus-metavariable: $X` is very important, and using `pattern: $X` is **not** equivalent. With `focus-metavariable: $X` we match exactly the formal parameter. Click "Open in Playground" below and use "Inspect Rule" to visualize what the source is matching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the use of `focus-metavariable: $X` is very important, and using `pattern: $X` is **not** equivalent. With `focus-metavariable: $X`, Semgrep matches the formal parameter exactly. Click "Open in Playground" below and use "Inspect Rule" to visualize what the source is matching.
```

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=L1vJ6" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

> Now do the same with this other taint rule that uses `pattern: $X`. The `pattern: $X` does not match the formal parameter itself, but matches all its uses inside the function definition. Even if `x` is sanitized via `x = sanitize(x)`, the occurrence of `x` inside `sink(x)` is a taint source itself (due to `pattern: $X`) and so `sink(x)` is tainted!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example does the same with this other taint rule that uses `pattern: $X`. The `pattern: $X` does not match the formal parameter itself, but matches all its uses inside the function definition. Even if `x` is sanitized via `x = sanitize(x)`, the occurrence of `x` inside `sink(x)` is a taint source itself (due to `pattern: $X`) and so `sink(x)` is tainted!
```

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=Qr3Y4" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

### Control sources (Pro) 🧪

**Control taint sources is a Semgrep Pro feature.**

Typically taint analysis tracks the flow of tainted _data_, but taint sources can also track the flow of tainted _control_ by setting `control: true`.

```yaml
pattern-sources:
- pattern: source(...)
  control: true
```

This is useful for checking _reachability_, that is to check if from a given code location the control-flow can reach another code location, regardless of whether there is any flow of data between them. In the following example we check whether `foo()` could be followed by `bar()`:

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=yyjrx" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

> In essence, using a control source we can define a context, from which Semgrep will detect if a call to some other code (i.e., the sink) can be reached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using a control source, you can define a context from which Semgrep detects if a call to some other code, such as a sink, can be reached.
```

:::note

> Using [taint labels](#taint-labels-pro-) it is possible to combine both data and control sources in the same rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [taint labels](#taint-labels-pro-) to combine both data and control sources in the same rule.
```

```yaml
pattern-sanitizers:
- pattern: sanitize(...)
```

The reason is that the pattern `sanitize(...)` matches all of `sanitize(sink("taint"))`, and that makes Semgrep consider every subexpression in that piece of code as being sanitized. In particular, `"taint"` is considered to be sanitized!

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=v83Rb" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

This is the default for historical reasons, but it may change in the future.

It is possible to instruct Semgrep to only consider as sanitized the "exact" matches of a sanitizer pattern by setting `exact: true`:

```yaml
pattern-sanitizers:
- pattern: sanitize(...)
  exact: true
```

Once the source is "exact", Semgrep will no longer consider subexpressions as sanitized, and `sink("taint")` inside `sanitize(sink("taint"))` will be reported as a tainted sink.

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=Zqz8o" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

For many rules this distinction is not very meaningful because it does not always make sense that a sink occurs inside the arguments of a sanitizer function.

:::note

> If one of your rules relies on non-exact matching of sanitizers, we advice you to make it explicit with `exact: false`, even if it is the current default, so that your rule does not break if the default changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If one of your rules relies on non-exact matching of sanitizers, We at Semgrep advise you to make it explicit with `exact: false`, even if it is the current default, so that your rule does not break if the default changes.
```
https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#we

Just making it clear who "we" are, at least at this point in the doc.

```yaml
pattern-sanitizers:
  - patterns:
      - pattern: check_if_safe($X)
      - focus-metavariable: $X
    by-side-effect: true
```
When this option is enabled, and the sanitizer specification matches a variable (or in general, an l-value) exactly, then Semgrep assumes that the variable (or l-value) is sanitized by side-effect at the precise places where the sanitizer specification produces a match.

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=4bvGz" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

:::note
It is important to use `focus-metavariable: $X` to focus the match on the l-value that we want to sanitize, otherwise `by-side-effect` does not work as expected.
:::

If the sanitizer does not set `by-side-efect`, then only the very occurrence of `x` in `check_if_safe(x)` will be sanitized, but not the occurrence of `x` in `sink(x)`. The sanitizer specification matches only the first occurrence and, without `by-side-effect: true`, Semgrep does not know that `check_if_safe` is updating/sanitizing the variable `x` by side-effect. Thus, a taint rule using such specification does produce a finding for `sink(x)` in the example above.

:::info

> One can be tempted to write a sanitizer specification as the one below (and this was the official workaround before `by-side-effect`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can be tempted to write a sanitizer specification as the one below (and this was the official workaround before `by-side-effect`):
```

```yaml
pattern-sanitizers:
- patterns:
  - pattern-inside: |
      check_if_safe($X)
      ...
  - pattern: $X
```

This tells Semgrep that **every** occurrence of `$X` after `check_if_safe($X)` must be considered santized.

> This approach has two main limitations. First, it overrides any further tainting that can be performed on the code matched by `$X`.  In the example code below, the call `sink(x)` is  **not** reported as tainted despite `x` has been tainted!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach has two main limitations. First, it overrides any further tainting that can be performed on the code matched by `$X`.  In the example code below, the call `sink(x)` is  **not** reported as tainted despite `x` having been tainted!
```

```python
check_if_safe(x)
x = source()
sink(x) # false negative
```

> Note also that [`...` ellipses operator](/writing-rules/pattern-syntax/#ellipses-and-statement-blocks) has limitations. For example, in the code below Semgrep does still match despite `x` has been sanitized in both branches:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note also that [`...` ellipses operator](/writing-rules/pattern-syntax/#ellipses-and-statement-blocks) has limitations. For example, in the code below Semgrep still matches despite `x` having been sanitized in both branches:
```

```python
if cond:
    check_if_safe(x)
else
    check_if_safe(x)
sink(x) # false positive
```

The `by-side-effect` option was added precisely [to address those limitations](https://semgrep.dev/playground/s/PeB3W). However, that kind of workaround can still be useful in other situations!
:::

## Sinks

> A taint sink is specified by a pattern. Like in a search-mode rule, you can start this pattern with one of the following keys: `pattern`, `patterns`, `pattern-either`, `pattern-regex`. Unlike for sources and sanitizers, by default Semgrep does not consider the subexpressions of the matched expressions as sinks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A taint sink is specified by a pattern. Like in a search-mode rule, you can start this pattern with one of the following keys: `pattern`, `patterns`, `pattern-either`, `pattern-regex`. Unlike sources and sanitizers, by default Semgrep does not consider the subexpressions of the matched expressions as sinks.
```

It is possible to instruct Semgrep to consider as a taint sink any of the subexpressions matching the sink pattern, by setting `exact: false`:

```yaml
pattern-sinks:
- pattern: sink(...)
  exact: false
```

Once the sink is "non-exact", Semgrep will consider subexpressions as taint sinks, and `tainted` inside `sink("foo" if tainted else "bar")` will then be reported as a tainted sink.

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=qNwez" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

### Function arguments as sinks

We can specify that only one (or a susbet) of the arguments of a function is the actual sink by using `focus-metavariable`:

```javascript
pattern-sinks:
  - patterns:
    - pattern: sink($SINK, ...)
    - focus-metavariable: $SINK
```

This rule causes Semgrep to only annotate the first parameter passed to `sink` as the sink, rather than the function `sink` itself. If taint goes into any other parameter of `sink`, then that is not considered a problem.

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=v83Nl" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

> Remember, anything that you can matchn with Semgrep can be made into a sink, like the index in an array access:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anything that you can match with Semgrep can be made into a sink, like the index in an array access:
```

```javascript
pattern-sinks:
  - patterns:
    - pattern-inside: $ARRAY[$SINK]
    - focus-metavariable: $SINK
```

:::note
If you specify a sink such as `sink(...)` then any tainted data passed to `sink`, through any of its arguments, results in a finding.

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=OrAAe" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>
:::

### At-exit sinks (Pro) 🧪

**At-exit taint sinks is a Semgrep Pro feature.**

> At-exit sinks are meant to facilitate writing leak-detection rules using taint-mode. By setting `at-exit: true` you can restrict a sink specification to only match at "exit" statements, that is statements after which the control-flow will exit the function being analyzed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At-exit sinks are meant to facilitate writing leak-detection rules using taint mode. By setting `at-exit: true` you can restrict a sink specification to only match at "exit" statements, that is statements after which the control-flow will exit the function being analyzed.
```

```
pattern-sinks:
- pattern-either:
  - pattern: return ...
  - pattern: $F(...)
  at-exit: true
```

The above sink pattern matches either `return` statements (which are always "exit" statements), or function calls occuring as "exit" statements.

Unlike regular sinks, at-exit sinks trigger a finding if any tainted l-value reaches the location of the sink. For example, the at-exit sink specification above will trigger a finding at a `return 0` statement if some tainted l-value reaches the `return`, even if `return 0` itself is not tainted. The location itself is the sink rather than the code that is at that location.

> We can use this, for example, to check that file descriptors are being closed within the same function where they were opened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use this, for example, to check that file descriptors are being closed within the same function where they were opened.
```

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=OrAzB" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

> The `print(content)` statement is reported because the control-flow exits the function at that point, and the file has not been closed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `print(content)` statement is reported because the control-flow exits the function at that point, and the file has not been closed.
```
```suggestion
The `print(content)` statement is reported because the control flow exits the function at that point, and the file has not been closed.
```

A propagator also needs to specify the origin (`from`) and the destination (`to`) of the taint to be propagated.

| Field      | Type                       | Description                                                            |
| :----------|:------------------------- | :--------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `from`     | metavariable              | Source of propagation. |
| `to`       | metavariable              | Destination of propagation. |

In addition, taint propagators accept the following options:

| Option            | Type                      | Default | Description                                                            |
| :-----------------|:------------------------- | :------ | :--------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `by-side-effect`  | {`false`, `true`} | `true` | See [_Propagation without side-effect_](#propagation-without-side-effect).               |

For example, given the following propagator, if taint goes into the second argument of `strcpy`, its first argument will get the same taint:

```yaml
pattern-propagators:
- pattern: strcpy($DST, $SRC)
  from: $SRC
  to: $DST
```

:::info

> Taint propagators only work intra-procedurally, that is, within a function or method. You cannot use taint propagators to propagate taint across different functions/methods, that is the job of [inter-procedural analysis](#inter-procedural-analysis-pro).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taint propagators only work intra-procedurally, that is, within a function or method. You cannot use taint propagators to propagate taint across different functions/methods. Use [inter-procedural analysis](#inter-procedural-analysis-pro).
```
Just confirming: does this mean to say that if a user flips on Semgrep Pro Engine, their taint rules that use propagators will all be able to detect interfile propagations? Can we say something like: turn on Semgrep Pro Engine so that your rules with propagators can perform interfile analysis.

  to: $X
```

### Propagation without side-effect

> Taint propagators can be used in very imaginative ways, and in some cases we may not want taint to propagate by side-effect. This can be achieved by disabling `by-side-effect` (enabled be default).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taint propagators can be used in very imaginative ways, and in some cases you may not want taint to propagate by side-effect. This can be achieved by disabling `by-side-effect`, which is enabled be default.
```

> Taint propagators can be used in very imaginative ways, and in some cases you may not want taint to propagate by side-effect. This can be achieved by disabling `by-side-effect`, which is enabled be default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taint propagators can be used in very imaginative ways, and in some cases you may not want taint to propagate by side-effect. This can be achieved by disabling `by-side-effect`, which is enabled by default.
```

For example:

```yaml
pattern-propagators:
  - patterns:
    - pattern: |
        if something($FROM):
          ...
          $TO()
          ...
    from: $FROM
    to: $TO
    by-side-effect: false
```

The propagator above specifies that inside an `if` block, where the condition is `something($FROM)`, we want to propagate taint from `$FROM` to any function that is being called without arguments, `$TO()`.

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=4bv6x" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

> Because we are disabling `by-side-effect`, the `sink` occurence that is inside the `if` block is tainted, but this does not affect the `sink` occurrence outside the `if` block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the rule disables `by-side-effect`, the `sink` occurrence that is inside the `if` block is tainted, but this does not affect the `sink` occurrence outside the `if` block.
```

## Findings

Taint findings are accompanied by a taint trace that explains how the taint flows from source to sink.

<!-- <iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=KxJRL" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe> -->

### Deduplication of findings

> Semgrep tracks all the possible ways that taint can reach a sink, but at present it only reports one taint trace among the possible ones. Click "Open in Playground" in the example below, run the example to get one finding, and then ask the Playground to visualize the dataflow of the finding. Even though `sink` can be tainted via `x` or via `y`, the trace will only show you one of these possibiities. If you e.g. replace `x = user_input` with `x = "safe"`, then Semgrep will then report the taint trace via `y`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Semgrep tracks all the possible ways that taint can reach a sink, but at present it only reports one taint trace among the possible ones. Click "Open in Playground" in the example below, run the example to get one finding, and then ask the Playground to visualize the dataflow of the finding. Even though `sink` can be tainted via `x` or via `y`, the trace will only show you one of these possibiities. If you replace `x = user_input` with `x = "safe"`, then Semgrep will then report the taint trace via `y`.
```
> Ask the playground to visualize...
Do you mean clicking on Inspect rule in the playground?

Author: Nope, clicking on the list of matches (on the right bottom), then click "dataflow" for the match in question.

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=WAYzL" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

### Report findings on the sources (Pro)

**Reporting findings on the source of taint is a Semgrep Pro feature.**

> By default Semgrep reports taint findings at the location of the sink being matched, and one must look at the taint trace to identify where the taint is coming from. It is also possible to make Semgrep report the findings at the location of the taint sources, by setting the [rule-level option](/writing-rules/rule-syntax/#options) `taint_focus_on` to `source`. Then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default Semgrep reports taint findings at the location of the sink being matched. You must look at the taint trace to identify where the taint is coming from. It is also possible to make Semgrep report the findings at the location of the taint sources, by setting the [rule-level option](/writing-rules/rule-syntax/#options) `taint_focus_on` to `source`. Then
```

Reviewer: Is something supposed to follow "then..."?

Author: Whoops, I think no. I guess I thought about writing something more but then decided not to, but forgot to remove that.

| Rule option                   | Default | Description                                                            |
| :-----------------------------| :------ | :--------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `taint_assume_safe_booleans`  | `false` | Boolean data is never considered tainted (works better with type annotations). |
| `taint_assume_safe_numbers`   | `false` | Numbers (integers, floats) are never considered tainted (works better with type annotations). |
| `taint_assume_safe_indexes`   | `false` | An index expression `I` tainted does not make an access expression `E[I]` tainted (it is only tainted if `E` is tainted). |
| `taint_assume_safe_functions` | `false` | A function call like `F(E)` is not considered tainted even if `E` is tainted. (When using Pro's [inter-procedural taint analysis](#inter-procedural-analysis-pro), this only applies to functions for which Semgrep cannot find a definition.)  |
| `taint_only_propagate_through_assignments` 🧪 | `false` | Disables all implicit taint propagation except for assignments. |

### Restrict taint by type (Pro)

> By enabling `taint_assume_safe_booleans` Semgrep will automatically sanitize Boolean expressions (when it can infer that).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By enabling `taint_assume_safe_booleans` Semgrep automatically sanitizes Boolean expressions when it can infer that the expression resolves to Boolean.
```

Reviewer: Correct me if I'm mistaken, but the ability to infer is one of those things that Semgrep does at different levels depending on the language. For example, we do this for Java's stdlib, but I'm not aware of if we do this for other stdlibs?

Reviewer: Stylistically, the reason why I replaced "when it can infer that" with a much longer phrase is because "that" (pronoun) can be a little vague. I just wanted to make the text clearer.

For example, comparing a tainted string against a constant string will not be considered a tainted expression:

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=6JvzK" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

> Similarly, enabling `taint_assume_safe_numbers` Semgrep will automatically sanitize numeric expressions (when it can infer that).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, enabling `taint_assume_safe_numbers` Semgrep will automatically sanitize numeric expressions when it can infer that the expression is numeric.
```

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=oqjgX" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

You could define explicit sanitizers that clean the taint from Boolean or numeric expressions, but these options are more convenient and also more efficient. 

:::note
Semgrep Pro's ability to infer types for expressions varies depending on the language. For example, in Python type annotations are not always present, and the `+` operator can also be used to concatenate strings. Semgrep also ignores the types of functions and classes coming from third-party libraries.

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=zdjnn" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>
:::

### Assume tainted indexes are safe

> By default, Semgrep assumes that accessing an array-like object with a tainted index (that is, `obj[tainted]`) is itself tainted expression, even if the object itself is not tainted. Setting `taint_assume_safe_indexes: true` makes Semgrep assume that these expressions are safe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Semgrep assumes that accessing an array-like object with a tainted index (that is, `obj[tainted]`) is itself a tainted **expression**, even if the **object** itself is not tainted. Setting `taint_assume_safe_indexes: true` makes Semgrep assume that these expressions are safe.
```

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=X56pj" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

### Assume function calls are safe

:::note

> We refer to a function call as _opaque_ when Semgrep does not have access to its definition, in order to examine it and determine its "taint behavior" (e.g., whether the function call propagates or not any taint that comes through its inputs). In Semgrep OSS, where taint analysis is intra-procedural, all function calls are opaque. In Semgrep Pro, with [inter-procedural taint analysis](#inter-procedural-analysis-pro), an opaque function could be one coming from a third-party library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This documentation refers to a function call as **opaque** when Semgrep does not have access to its definition, in order to examine it and determine its "taint behavior", such as whether the function call propagates or not any taint that comes through its inputs.

In Semgrep OSS, where taint analysis is intra-procedural, all function calls are opaque.

In Semgrep Pro, with [inter-procedural taint analysis](#inter-procedural-analysis-pro), an opaque function could be one coming from a third-party library.
```

Reviewer: We don't have any references at all wrt to level of "magic" that Semgrep supports per language, no? Didn't we have a reference table somewhere?

Author: What do you mean bye "magic"?

Reviewer: Sorry, my question about magic was not directly related to opacity, but more of "what does Semgrep understand" wrt to stdlib. For example, a beginner rule-writer would not be able to infer from just reading the rule that Semgrep is able to discern that `endsWith()` returns a boolean. It's kinda subtle, but knowing that Semgrep can do that alters the way we'd write a Java rule, because we can take Semgrep's understanding of standard library functions into consideration. 

Ref: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic_(programming)

:::

> By default Semgrep considers that an _opaque_ function call propagates any taint passed via any of its arguments to its output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default Semgrep considers that an _opaque_ function call propagates any taint passed through any of its arguments to its output.
```

For example, in the code below, `some_safe_function` receives tainted data as input, so Semgrep assumes that it also returns tainted data as output. As a result, a finding is produced.

```javascript
var x = some_safe_function(tainted);
sink(x); // undesired finding here
```

> This can of course generate false positives, and for certain rules on certain codebases it can produce a high amount of noise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can generate false positives, and for certain rules on certain codebases it can produce a high amount of noise.
```

Setting `taint_assume_safe_functions: true` makes Semgrep assume that opaque function calls are safe and do not propagate any taint. If it is desired that specific functions do propagate taint, then that can be achieved via custom propagators:

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=gBD0" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

> ### Propagate only via assignments 🧪

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Propagate only through assignments 🧪
```

The following example demonstrates the use of source and sink metavariable unification:

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=G652" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

> ## Inter-procedural analysis (Pro)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Inter-procedural analysis (Pro)
```
Should we call this "cross-function"?

Author: I'd prefer we just add a clarification in the text like "also referred as cross-function" or something. I see "cross-function" as a more marketing friendly term targeting those who will actually buy, whereas I see these docs as oriented towards rule writers or those who will actually use the tool. If you google both terms you see that "interprocedural analysis" gives you very relevant results, whereas "cross-function analysis" gives you mostly unrelated results.

**Inter-procedural taint analysis is a Semgrep Pro feature.**

[Semgrep Pro](/semgrep-pro-vs-oss/) can perform inter-procedural taint analysis, that is, to track taint across multiple functions.

> In the example below, `user_input` is passed to `foo` as input and, from there, it flows to the sink at line 3, trough a call-chain involving three functions. Semgrep is able to track this and report the sink as tainted. Semgrep also provides an inter-procedural taint trace that explains how exactly `user_input` reaches the `sink(z)` statement (click "Open in Playground", then click on "dataflow" in the "Matches" panel).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, `user_input` is passed to `foo` as input and, from there, flows to the sink at line 3, through a call chain involving three functions. Semgrep is able to track this and report the sink as tainted. Semgrep also provides an inter-procedural taint trace that explains how exactly `user_input` reaches the `sink(z)` statement (click "Open in Playground", then click on "dataflow" in the "Matches" panel).
```

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=PeBXv" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

Using the CLI option `--pro-intrafile`, Semgrep will perform inter-procedural (across functions) _intra_-file (within one file) analysis. That is, it will track taint across functions, but it will not cross file boundaries. This is supported for essentially every language, and performance is very close to that of intra-procedural taint analysis.

Using the CLI option `--pro`, Semgrep will perform inter-procedural (across functions) as well as *inter*-file (across files) analysis. Inter-file analysis is only supported for [a subset of languages](/supported-languages/#semgrep-code-language-support). For a rule to run inter-file it also needs to set `interfile: true`:

```yaml
options:
  interfile: true
```

> **Memory requirements for inter-file analysis:**

Reviewer: Note for myself to add this to the top-level Semgrep Pro Engine docs too.

> While inter-file analysis is more powerful, be aware that it also demands more memory resources. We advise a minimum of 4 GB of memory per core, but _recommend 8 GB per core or more_. The amount of memory needed depends on the codebase and on the number of inter-file rules being run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While interfile analysis is more powerful, it also demands more memory resources. The Semgrep team advises a minimum of 4 GB of memory per core, but **recommend 8 GB per core or more**. The amount of memory needed depends on the codebase and on the number of interfile rules being run.
```

> ## How sensitive is taint-mode ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Taint mode sensitivity
```
For consistency among headings.

### Field sensitivity

> The taint engine provides basic field sensitivity support, it can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The taint engine provides basic field sensitivity support. It can:
```

- Track that `x.a.b` is tainted, but `x` or `x.a` is  **not** tainted. If `x.a.b` is tainted, any extension of `x.a.b` (such as `x.a.b.c`) is considered tainted by default.
- Track that `x.a` is tainted, but remember that `x.a.b` has been sanitized. Thus the engine records that `x.a.b` is **not** tainted, but `x.a` or `x.a.c` are still tainted.

:::note
The taint engine does track taint **per variable** and not **per object in memory**. The taint engine does not track aliasing at present.
:::

<iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=5rvkj" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

### Index sensitivity (Pro)

**Index sensitivity is a Semgrep Pro feature.**

Semgrep Pro has basic index sensitivity support:
- Only for accesses using the built-in `a[E]` syntax.
- Works for _statically constant_ indexes that may be either integers (e.g. `a[42]`) or strings (e.g. `a["foo"]`).
- If an arbitrary index `a[i]` is sanitized, then every index becomes clean of taint.

> <iframe src="https://semgrep.dev/embed/editor?snippet=GdoK6" border="0" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="432"></iframe>

Reviewer: Sorry @IagoAbal it was meant to go here:

kyle
2 hours ago
Yello! I think there is an error on this page:
https://semgrep.dev/docs/writing-rules/experiments/taint-labels/
I believe the test code should look like:

def bad(user_input):
    x = user_input
    # ok: taint-labels (no evil!)
    sink(x)

rather than the current code, which shows `sink(y)` 🙂

observation from @jkylekelly

> ## Taint labels (Pro) 🧪

Reviewer: This was originally its own document, right? Why did we move it out?

Author: Prefer to have everything under one page, for better visibility. Also, despite taint labels are kinda "unstable", we use them a lot ourselves and they're not going away.

Taint labels increase the expressiveness of taint analysis by allowing you to specify and track different kinds of tainted data in one rule using labels. This functionality has various uses, for example, when data becomes dangerous in several steps that are hard to specify through single pair of source and sink.

> <iframe class="yt_embed" width="100%" height="432px" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/lAbJdzMUR4k" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Reviewer: kyle
 [2 hours ago](https://semgrepinc.slack.com/archives/C02JT6YA5S7/p1711423039363669)
Yello!  I think there is an error on this page:
https://semgrep.dev/docs/writing-rules/experiments/taint-labels/
I believe the test code should look like:
def bad(user_input):
    x = user_input
    # ok: taint-labels (no evil!)
    sink(x)
rather than the current code, which shows sink(y) :slightly_smiling_face:

observation from @jkylekelly

Author: Is this related to Pieter's video?

Reviewer: Found the right line. Resolving this one.
